.Dd June 23, 2026
.Dt TE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm te
.Nd lightweight text editor with spellchecker, thesaurus, translator and charset conversion
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm te
.Op Ar file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm te
is a lightweight text editor for Unix-like systems with full UTF-8 support,
multiple charset conversion, syntax highlighting, configurable colors,
undo/redo, search and replace, mouse support, bracketed paste, clipboard,
tab system for editing multiple files, spellchecker, hyphenation, thesaurus,
translator and editing assistance features.
.Sh INITIAL CONFIGURATION
On first run,
.Nm te
creates a configuration directory at
.Pa ~/.tinyedit
and a configuration file at
.Pa ~/.tinyedit/config
in the user's home directory. This file stores editor preferences including
colors, charset settings, wrap mode, line numbers, tab width, undo levels,
spellchecker, hyphenation, thesaurus, translator and editing assistance features.
.Sh SETUP
The Setup menu (F4 or Alt+T) allows configuration of:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Default charset for reading and writing files
.It
Color schemes and cursor color
.It
Tab width and undo levels
.It
Hard/soft wrap mode and auto-wrap column
.It
Line numbers display
.It
Whitespace markers, bracket matching, current line highlight, indent guides,
column ruler and wrap indicator
.It
Syntax highlighting
.It
Word count and auto-save interval
.It
Bracket auto-close and smart indent
.It
Spellchecker settings (dictionary path, dictionary name, custom dictionary)
.It
Hyphenation settings (dictionary path, hyphen wrap, detect on load)
.It
Thesaurus settings (dictionary path, dictionary name)
.It
Translator settings (backend, endpoint, API key, language pair, StarDict path)
.It
Editing assistance toggles (smart quotes, auto-cap, repeated words)
.It
Mouse and word movement style
.It
Other editor preferences
.El
.Sh WRAP MODES
.Nm te
supports two wrap modes:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Soft-wrap (default): Visual wrapping only, no line breaks inserted
.It
Hard-wrap: Inserts carriage returns at the configured column width
.El
Toggle between modes with Alt+Q.
.Sh TABS
.Nm te
supports editing multiple files simultaneously using a tab system.
Each tab maintains its own editing state, undo history, and cursor position.
.Pp
Alt+J and Alt+K switch between tabs.
Alt+W closes the current tab.
Alt+1-9 and Alt+0 switch to specific tabs.
Press F9 or Alt+L to toggle the tabs panel visibility.
.Sh LINE NUMBERS
Line numbers can be enabled or disabled in Setup (Alt+D toggles).
When enabled, line numbers are displayed in the left margin.
.Sh MOUSE SUPPORT
.Nm te
supports mouse input in compatible terminals. Single click places the cursor,
double click selects a word, triple click selects a paragraph, and drag extends
the selection. The mouse wheel scrolls the document vertically. Mouse support
can be enabled or disabled in Setup.
.Sh BRACKETED PASTE
On Unix terminals that support bracketed paste,
.Nm te
detects pasted text and prevents it from triggering keyboard shortcuts. A
fallback rapid-paste detector is used for terminals without bracketed paste
support.
.Sh CLIPBOARD
.Nm te
supports block selection, copy, cut and paste. On Unix-like systems it uses
.Xr xclip 1 ,
.Xr xsel 1 ,
.Xr wl-paste 1
or
.Xr pbpaste 1
when available; in SSH sessions without an external clipboard backend it falls
back to OSC 52 or an internal clipboard. Selected blocks can also be exported to
a file.
.Sh STATUS BAR
The status bar at the bottom shows the current line and column, total line count,
wrap mode (HARD/SOFT), spell checker indicator, insert/overwrite mode, word count
when enabled, and program status messages. The title bar at the top shows the
current filename, modified indicator and, on Unix, the process identifier.
.Sh EDITOR
.Nm te
is a full-featured text editor with syntax highlighting, bracket matching,
undo/redo, multiple selection modes and editing assistance features.
.Ss Syntax Highlighting
.Nm te
provides syntax highlighting for C, C++, x86/m68k assembler and Amiga C. It is
enabled by default and can be turned off in Setup. The editor highlights
keywords, strings, comments, numbers, preprocessor directives and operators.
.Ss Brackets and Current Line
Bracket matching highlights matching pairs of (, [ and { on the same line. The
current line can also be highlighted in the background when enabled in Setup.
.Ss Whitespace, Guides, Ruler and Wrap Indicator
.Nm te
can display whitespace markers (tabs as arrows and trailing spaces as dots),
indent guides at each tab stop, a column ruler and a soft-wrap indicator at the
end of continued visual lines. Each of these can be toggled individually in
Setup.
.Ss Autoclose and Smart Indent
When enabled, typing an opening bracket or quote inserts the matching closing
character and leaves the cursor between them. Smart indent copies the leading
whitespace of the previous line when pressing Enter.
.Ss Word Count and Autosave
.Nm te
can show a word count in the status bar. Auto-save writes an atomic .swp copy
next to the original file at a configurable interval when enabled.
.Ss Insert/Overwrite and Word Movement
The editor supports insert and overwrite modes. Word movement can be set to
standard (alphanumeric plus underscore) or vim-like (non-space blocks).
.Ss Go to Line
Press Alt+G to open the go-to-line dialog.
.Ss Rewrap Paragraph
The current paragraph can be rewrapped to the configured auto-wrap column.
Rewrap uses hyphenation when enabled and a dictionary is loaded.
.Ss Spellchecker
.Nm te
includes Hunspell-based spellchecking with support for multiple languages.
Spellchecker settings are configured in Setup: enable/disable spellchecking, set
the dictionary path, select the dictionary name (e.g., en_US, es_ES, de_DE,
fr_FR), and specify a custom dictionary file.
.Pp
Misspelled words are highlighted in red. The spell checker panel shows whether
the current word is correct and provides suggestions for misspelled words.
Accepted words can be added to the custom dictionary.
.Pp
Press Alt+P to check the word under cursor and see suggestions.
Press Enter to accept a suggestion, ESC to cancel.
Press Alt+H to toggle the spell checker panel.
.Ss Hyphenation
.Nm te
supports hyphenation at the hard-wrap column when enabled. Hyphenation
dictionaries follow the LibreOffice format (hyph_*.dic). Enable in Setup under
the "Hyphenation" section. A hyphenation detect-on-load option can identify
existing wrap-hyphens when opening files.
.Pp
Press Alt+E to toggle hyphen wrap mode.
.Ss Thesaurus
.Nm te
includes thesaurus support (MyThes) for synonym lookup. Thesaurus dictionaries
consist of .idx and .dat files (th_*). Access with Alt+A to see synonyms for
the word under cursor. The thesaurus can fall back to spell checker stemming
when available.
.Ss Editing Assistance
.Nm te
provides real-time editing assistance features:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Smart quotes: Auto-converts straight quotes to curly quotes based on context
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Typing ' after a letter becomes closing apostrophe (')
.It
Typing ' after space becomes opening apostrophe (')
.It
Same logic applies to double quotes (" / ")
.El
.It
Auto-cap: Automatically capitalizes the first letter of a word when starting a sentence
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
After . ! or ? followed by space
.It
At document start
.It
After empty line (paragraph separator)
.It
After line ending in . ! or ?
.El
.It
Repeated words: Highlights repeated words in the same line
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Visual highlight (inverted background) for words like "the the"
.It
Case-insensitive comparison
.El
.El
.Pp
These features can be toggled individually in Setup under "Editor Assistance".
.Sh RICH TEXT AND LEGACY FORMATS
.Nm te
can load and save rich-text files in RTF 1.x and WordPerfect 4.2 formats.
Files with the
.Pa .rtf
or
.Pa .wp / .wp4
extension are routed through the corresponding importer/exporter.
.Pp
RTF files preserve bold, italic, underline and paragraph alignment.
Font and size are read from the file but are not written back, and color
information is dropped. Non-ASCII characters are emitted as
\eu escapes with a
.Sq ?
fallback.
.Pp
WordPerfect 4.2 files preserve bold, italic, underline and paragraph alignment.
Only 8-bit charsets (e.g. LATIN-1, CP850, CP1252) can be used for saving; UTF-8
is rejected. Characters that cannot be encoded in the selected charset are
replaced with
.Sq ?
and a warning is shown.
Font and size are not written.
.Pp
When a rich-text file is loaded or saved with the matching extension, the tab
switches to rich mode and the formatting shortcuts can be used.
.Sh GRAMMAR CHECKER
.Nm te
includes an experimental grammar/style checker when compiled with
.Sy USE_GRAMMAR=1 .
It uses self-contained C code and loads
.Pa .rul
rule packs. The bundled
.Pa rules/
directory contains packs for English, Spanish, German, French, Italian and
Portuguese; more can be generated from LanguageTool XML files with
.Pa tools/lt2rul.py .
.Pp
The grammar checker operates on UTF-8 text; documents that use a non-UTF-8
charset may produce incorrect results.
.Pp
Enable and configure the rule pack from Setup (F4) under the dictionary panel.
.Sh TRANSLATOR
.Nm te
includes a translator panel that can be compiled with online translation
backends (MyMemory, LibreTranslate, Lingva or DeepL) or offline StarDict
dictionaries. Configure the backend, endpoint, API key, source/target language
pair and StarDict path in Setup. The panel is shared with the spell checker
interface and can be cycled to show the translator or dictionary view.
.Sh CHARSET CONVERSION
.Nm te
always works internally with UTF-8. There are two ways to configure charsets:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Default charset (Setup):
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Press F4 or Alt+T to open Setup
.It
In the Editor tab, go to the "Charset" field
.It
Press Enter to cycle through available charsets
.It
This will be the charset used by default when saving files
.El
.It
Temporary charset for the current file (F3):
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Press F3 or Alt+C to change the read/write charset for the current file
.It
Select the read charset (View) and save charset (Save)
.It
If you change the read charset (View), the file is reloaded from disk with the new encoding
.It
If you only change the save charset (Save), the file is not reloaded
.El
.El
.Pp
Available charsets: UTF-8, LATIN-1, LATIN-2, CP437, CP850, CP865, CP866, CP1252
.Sh SEARCH
.Nm te
provides search and replace functionality with optional case-sensitive and
whole-word matching. Search results are highlighted in the document and can be
navigated forward and backward. Replace supports replacing a single occurrence
or all occurrences at once. Press ESC to exit search mode.
.Sh UNICODE GLYPHS
Press F8 or Alt+U to open the Unicode glyph picker, which allows insertion
of any Unicode character by browsing and selecting from the full Unicode
character set.
.Sh FILE OPERATIONS
.Nm te
supports opening files, saving, save-as and inserting another file at the
cursor position. The integrated file picker allows browsing directories and
selecting files. When saving a file for the first time, the editor prompts for
a filename.
.Sh HELP
.Nm te
includes an integrated help panel that lists the available keyboard shortcuts
and commands. Press F1 or Alt+Y to open it and see the full shortcut reference
for the current build.
.Sh KEYBOARD SHORTCUTS
.Ss Navigation and editing
.Bl -tag -width "Ctrl+Left/Right"
.It Sy Arrows
Move cursor
.It Sy Home / Ctrl+B
Line start
.It Sy End / Ctrl+E
Line end
.It Sy PgUp / Ctrl+U
Page up
.It Sy PgDn / Ctrl+D
Page down
.It Sy Ctrl+Left/Right
Word left / right
.It Sy Ctrl+G
Go to start of document
.It Sy Ctrl+K
Go to end of document
.It Sy Alt+G
Go to line
.It Sy Ctrl+Y
Delete line
.It Sy Ctrl+Z
Undo
.It Sy Alt+Z
Redo
.It Sy Ins / Alt+I
Toggle insert / overwrite
.It Sy Tab
Insert tab
.It Sy Ctrl+W
Rewrap FTN reply quote block
.It Sy Alt+Q
Toggle wrap mode
.It Sy Alt+D
Toggle line numbers
.It Sy Alt+E
Toggle hyphen wrap
.It Sy F3 / Alt+C
Choose output charset for current file
.El
.Pp
.Ss Block selection
.Bl -tag -width "Ctrl+Left/Right"
.It Sy Ctrl+C
Copy block
.It Sy Ctrl+X
Cut block
.It Sy Ctrl+V
Paste block (or clipboard)
.It Sy BS / Del
Delete block (no clipboard)
.It Sy Ctrl+O
Export block to file
.It Sy Alt+V
Sort selected lines
.It Sy Alt+X
Convert case of selected block
.El
.Pp
.Ss Files and tabs
.Bl -tag -width "Ctrl+Left/Right"
.It Sy F2 / Ctrl+S
Save
.It Sy F7 / Alt+O
Insert file at cursor
.It Sy Ctrl+L
Open file (new tab)
.It Sy Ctrl+N
New file (new tab)
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+Y
Open recent file
.It Sy ESC / F10
Quit
.It Sy F9 / Alt+L
Toggle tabs panel
.It Sy Alt+J
Next tab
.It Sy Alt+K
Previous tab
.It Sy Alt+W
Close current tab
.It Sy Alt+S
Toggle spell/translate panel
.It Sy F8 / Alt+U
Unicode glyph picker
.El
.Pp
.Ss Search and replace
.Bl -tag -width "Ctrl+Left/Right"
.It Sy F5 / Alt+F
Search / replace current
.It Sy Ctrl+R
Find & replace
.It Sy F3 / Alt+C
Previous result
.It Sy F4 / Alt+T
Next result
.It Sy F6 / Alt+B
Replace all (search mode)
.It Sy ESC
Exit search mode
.El
.Pp
.Ss Spell, hyphen and thesaurus
.Bl -tag -width "Ctrl+Left/Right"
.It Sy Alt+H
Toggle spell checker
.It Sy Alt+P
Spellcheck word under cursor
.It Sy Alt+A
Thesaurus lookup
.It Sy Alt+E
Toggle hyphen wrap
.El
.Pp
.Ss Optional features
Available when the corresponding feature is compiled in
.Pq USE_TRANSLATE=1 , USE_TTS=1 :
.Bl -tag -width "Ctrl+Alt+V (Alt+Shift+V on AmigaOS)"
.It Sy Ctrl+T
Toggle translator
.It Sy Alt+R
Translate selected text
.It Sy Alt+M
Dictionary popup (pick translation)
.It Sy Alt+N
Reverse lookup (scan dict)
.It Sy Alt+B
Exchange languages
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+X (Alt+Shift+X on AmigaOS)
Speak selection / paragraph
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+K (Alt+Shift+K on AmigaOS)
Speak entire document
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+P (Alt+Shift+P on AmigaOS)
Pause / resume speech
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+O (Alt+Shift+O on AmigaOS)
Stop speech
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+V (Alt+Shift+V on AmigaOS)
Voice settings popup
.El
.Pp
.Ss Rich text formatting
Available when the current tab is in rich-text mode
.Pq .rtf , .wp , .wp4 .
.Bl -tag -width "Ctrl+Alt+V (Alt+Shift+V on AmigaOS)"
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+B (Alt+Shift+B on AmigaOS)
Bold
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+I (Alt+Shift+I on AmigaOS)
Italic
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+U (Alt+Shift+U on AmigaOS)
Underline
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+L (Alt+Shift+L on AmigaOS)
Align left
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+E (Alt+Shift+E on AmigaOS)
Align center
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+R (Alt+Shift+R on AmigaOS)
Align right
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+J (Alt+Shift+J on AmigaOS)
Justify
.El
.Pp
.Ss Other
.Bl -tag -width "Ctrl+Left/Right"
.It Sy F1 / Alt+Y
Show help
.It Sy Ctrl+Alt+S
Cycle syntax language
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "~/.tinyedit/config"
.It Pa ~/.tinyedit/
Configuration directory.
.It Pa ~/.tinyedit/config
User configuration file.
.It Pa *.swp
Auto-save swap files written next to the original file when auto-save is enabled.
.El
.Sh DICTIONARY FORMATS
.Nm te
uses Hunspell-compatible dictionaries:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
\&.aff file: Affix rules and flags
.It
\&.dic file: Word list with flags
.El
.Pp
Hyphenation dictionaries:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
hyph_*.dic: Hyphenation patterns (LibreOffice format)
.El
.Pp
Thesaurus dictionaries:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
th_*.idx: Index file
.It
th_*.dat: Data file with synonym entries
.El
.Pp
StarDict offline dictionaries:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
\&.ifo file: Dictionary metadata
.It
\&.idx file: Index file
.It
\&.dict file: Dictionary data
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Tanausú M. Aq ervras@aim.com
